Good afternoon, everyone,
and welcome to the end of WWDC 2008.
My name-- You're not supposed
to cheer so much for the end.
I want to get some sleep too,
so that's okay.
My name is Greg Parker,
and today I'm going to talk to you
about some Objective-C and garbage
collection advanced features.
So the master's course syllabus.
We're going to start with some
Objective-C runtime features and
then go into some GC details,
particularly for low-level
GC programming for C level,
and upgrading a program to garbage
collection if you have an existing
code that is not garbage collected.
And finally, some GC debugging tips
for some hard-to-find and
hard-to-diagnose crashes.
So let's start with the
Objective-C runtime.
The topics I'm going to talk about today
briefly are some dynamic properties
and the modern Objective-C ABI.
Both of these are present in Leopard,
but they're a little bit
different in Snow Leopard,
and they're very different on the iPhone,
which is why we want to go
over them again this year.
The other topic is
virtual table dispatch,
which is a nifty little
addition in Snow Leopard.
We'll see in a minute.
Greg Parker
Dynamic properties.
If you went to the other
Objective-C sessions,
you saw some descriptions of basic
property usage using the atSynthesize.
atSynthesize tells the compiler to
create an implementation of the property,
to create the getter method,
create the setter method.
Dynamic is different.
Dynamic means you promise to
provide an implementation later
through some unspecified mechanism.
So that just tells the compiler
there will be an implementation.
Don't give a compiler warning and
trust you to do the right thing.
So what is the right thing?
You have a couple different options for
how to implement the dynamic property.
One option is basically
creating an abstract property.
In this case,
the superclass declares the property
and says @dynamic as the implementation.
And then at runtime,
there is no superclass implementation.
It's abstract.
Instead, the subclass actually
implements the property.
For example,
it could use atSynthesize in the
subclass's implementation or could
provide getter setter methods directly,
any number of alternatives.
This is a good way to get,
if you have an abstract method
in C++ and you want the similar
sort of model in Objective-C,
this is the closest you
can get using a property.
Another option for implementing
the property is to implement
it at runtime using the
Objective-C forwarding mechanism.
If you're unfamiliar with this system,
what happens at runtime if you
call a method that does not exist
is that instead a message is
sent called forward invocation,
which creates an NS invocation object,
which represents the
method that did not exist.
And your class and your object
can handle it themselves.
So in this case,
the getter method or the setter
method would be sent to the
object using forward invocation,
and you can implement forward
invocation to do whatever property
access you want to provide.
This mechanism is easy.
It's easy to write in your code.
Forward invocation is an
easy mechanism to use,
but it's slow.
Actually creating the invocation
object and calling forward
invocation takes some time,
and that needs to be
done every single time.
every time the property is accessed.
If you want more speed,
the option is to use the
new technique in Leopard,
which is a resolved property
or a resolved method.
This mechanism kicks in before
the forwarding machinery.
What it does, it calls the resolve
instance method on the class.
This mechanism allows the class to
create a method if one did not exist
just before that method gets called.
So it's really the last chance for
the class to provide an implementation
if it didn't have one already.
In the property case,
you can use the property metadata
that the runtime created,
that the compiler created,
to decide what the
implementation should look like.
So, for example,
CoreData NSManagedObject,
you can write a property
but not implement it.
CoreData will use the property metadata
and whatever database backing you're
using for CoreData to create the
implementation at runtime for you.
This mechanism is more difficult.
I believe there is a sample code on the
developer.apple.com to show how to do it,
but it's a little bit tricky,
but not too hard.
Once the implementation is added,
it's much faster.
It works just like an ordinary
method at full method speed.
Next, let's talk about Vtable Dispatch.
This is a performance
optimization in Snow Leopard.
The observation is a small number
of selectors are responsible for
most calls that your program makes.
ALEC, ENIT, RETAIN,
all these methods that everybody uses,
everybody calls them.
And they account for 50% or more of
the method sends in your process.
Well, let's make them faster.
How much faster?
Something like this.
Two to three times faster
of method dispatch for the
small number of selectors,
about a dozen or so,
that constitute most calls.
The way this works is
a little bit like C++.
Dynamic methods in C++
use an array lookup.
In Objective-C,
we use a hash table to provide
better compatibility and
more flexibility at runtime.
But for these methods, retain, release,
and a few others,
we do create a virtual table at runtime.
We do an array-based dispatch
instead of a hash table lookup.
As you can see, the array-based dispatch
is quite a bit faster.
Unlike C++,
this is Objective-C after all,
we like compatibility and flexibility.
The virtual table is not
hard-coded at compile time and
can be modified at runtime,
actually at application launch time.
So later on in Snow Leopard,
we expect to provide a mechanism
where your application can identify
which selectors you call frequently
and that you want to run faster.
The final Objective-C runtime
topics have to do with the
modern and legacy runtime ABI.
Greg
This describes the metadata layout,
the format on disk,
the format in memory of the
runtime's data structures.
On the iPhone and 64-bit Mac,
we have a new platform.
We could break binary compatibility.
So we redesigned all the data structures
in Leopard for better performance,
better memory usage,
and better forward compatibility
and forward features.
The iPhone simulator and 32-bit
Mac still use the legacy ABI.
Different performance,
different set of features.
So I'm going to talk about some
of the differences between them,
because if you're porting
to 64-bit on Snow Leopard,
or if you're writing
an iPhone application,
you need to know what the differences
are between those platforms versus
32-bit Mac and the iPhone simulator.
Greg Parker
The modern Objective-C ABI adds
stricter IVAR access control.
The legacy ABI has private IVARs
using the @private keyword.
But if you use an @private IVAR,
more specifically,
if you abuse an @private IVAR,
all you get is a compiler warning.
Your program still runs.
It still can use the IVAR.
And whoever made that private
IVAR is a little bit unhappy
because they wanted a private IVAR,
and you didn't honor that.
The modern ABI is a bit
stricter with its IVAR access.
If you access a private IVAR that
belongs to some other framework
that is outside of your code,
you may get a link error and
your program will not run.
This is an example of the link
error given a class name and
an IVAR name that you weren't
allowed to use that private IVAR.
So particularly if you're
porting from 32 to 64-bit,
or if you're compiling an iPhone
application that you've previously
only seen on the simulator,
you may see this error.
So moral of the story,
make sure you run your iPhone
application on a real iPhone,
or at least compile for a real iPhone,
to make sure you're not
abusing any private IVARs.
The other new IVAR access feature
is @Package IVAR protection.
This is a new qualifier added
in Leopard for the modern ABI.
The summary of how it behaves inside
your application or your framework
or wherever your IVAR is defined,
it looks like an at public IVAR.
Outside that,
it looks like a private IVAR.
So this is useful if you want more
protection than a public IVAR,
but less protection than a private IVAR.
And legacy runtime,
it just looks like a public IVAR.
The compiler doesn't
give you any warnings.
The linker doesn't give you any errors.
The final Objective-C feature
in the modern ABI is
non-fragile instance variables.
So let me show you a
fragile instance variable.
Here's a demonstration of
a subclass of NSWindow.
You're writing some new pet store
that's going to be the next killer app.
And you've added IVARs for the
kittens and the puppies that
are visible in the pet store
window in your NSWindow subclass.
So this is a diagram of how those
IVARs are laid out in memory.
Now let's say NS Window itself
wanted to add new IVARs.
The problem is, in the legacy ABI,
the IVARs collide.
They try and take the same memory,
and it crushes your kittens.
Aww.
We don't want this.
The modern ABI works better.
It moves the IVARs out of the way.
The compiler and the runtime
cooperate so that the IVAR offsets are
available to be modified at runtime
without recompiling the subclass,
which means the runtime can notice that
the superclass is now bigger or that
the IVARs got rearranged or anything
like that and modify the offsets so
that the code works without recompiling.
Saves the kittens.
Everybody's happy.
Again, this works in 64-bit,
and this works on an iPhone application,
but it does not work in the 32-bit Mac,
and it does not work on
the iPhone simulator.
The last ABI feature is
C++ compatible exceptions.
Again, let me show you what the
legacy ABI did wrong.
and how it works better in the modern.
Here's a simple set of code,
Objective-C++ code,
that is doing some exception handling.
We have a C++ try block
and an Objective-C throw.
The problem in the legacy ABI.
First of all,
we have a destructor for an object.
When the exception is thrown,
the destructor is not called because C++
exceptions and Objective-C exceptions
are not compatible in the legacy ABI.
We also have this catch block,
also not called when the
Objective-C exception is thrown.
The same thing would happen
if you reversed the cases,
if you had an Objective-C try
and a C++ throw.
The modern runtime fixes all of this.
It does call the destructor,
does call the catch block.
If we reverse the languages
to be Objective-C try,
C++ throw, it also works.
The destructor is called the
Objective-C default catch or
finally block is also called.
So 64-bit and iPhone,
the exceptions now work the
way you want if you're writing
C++ and Objective-C code.
One other detail, zero cost exceptions.
I put zero cost in quotes because
they're not really zero cost.
What zero cost means is actually
zero CPU time tri-blocks.
They still cost a memory.
Throwing exceptions still
takes a lot of time,
so you may not actually want to
use exceptions quite so much,
especially on the iPhone.
Exceptions are slow in general.
Greg
This diagram shows you which exceptions
are zero cost on which platforms.
64-bit Mac and iPhone
using the modern ABI,
C++ and Objective-C are either both
zero cost or neither zero cost.
In the legacy platforms,
the 32-bit Mac and the simulator,
Objective-C is not zero cost, but C++ is.
So just keep that in mind if you're
writing exception code and you care
about that performance of dry blocks.
So that's all I have to say
about the Objective-C runtime.
We've seen dynamic properties,
how you can build flexible
runtime storage for them.
We've seen Vtable dispatch,
a nice performance boost for you.
And we've seen the modern ABI,
which improves some features like
IVARs and exceptions if you're
writing for 64-bit Mac or if you're
writing for the iPhone platform.
Next on the agenda,
low-level garbage collection programming.
So I'm going to go through several topics
of how to write garbage collection code
at a low level when you're not working
with ordinary Objective-C objects.
I'll start with the
GC memory system in general.
Some of this will be familiar if you
saw the earlier garbage collection talk,
but I'll go to a bit more detail
about how the garbage collector works.
Objective-C's garbage collector
is designed for Objective-C code
and Objective-C objects.
That's where most of the code
to our platform is written.
That's what we've optimized for
and designed it to work best with.
It is not a new pointer-safe language.
We still have C, we still have void stars
we have to deal with.
And the garbage collector is not trying
to manage all memory in your process.
In particular,
malloc blocks are not managed.
They can still leak.
Malloc blocks are also
not scanned for pointers.
If you store a pointer to
a garbage-collected object
inside a malloc block,
the garbage collector may not see that
pointer and may throw the object away.
So let's talk about what the
garbage collector does manage.
It manages all of your
Objective-C objects.
core foundation objects,
CFStrings, CFArray.
And finally, it manages heap blocks from
a new foundation function
called NSAllocateCollectible.
This is basically your malloc replacement
if you want an ordinary block of data,
but you want the garbage collector to
know about it and to manage it for you.
Unlike your heap blocks from malloc,
or operator new for that matter,
the garbage collector will not
destroy those objects for you.
You're still responsible
for freeing them yourself.
I mentioned the garbage collector
does not look at all memory,
primarily for performance,
also because it's hard for the
garbage collector to know about
all the memory in your process.
Where does it look?
It looks in instance variables
and global variables of
Objective-C types and instance
variables and globals marked strong.
It also looks in some thread
stacks for NS threads,
and it looks inside some heap blocks,
the ones allocated with
NSAllocateCollectible
with the NSScanned option.
Everywhere else, it doesn't look.
Doesn't look in divars and
globals of other types.
Doesn't look inside malloc
memory or whatever other memory
you've allocated in your process.
So what does that mean for your
C data structures if you want them
to work in garbage collection?
Here's a GC incompatible data structure.
It's not really incompatible.
It's just a -- it's partly incompatible
in that it has an ID pointer,
that value pointer.
The garbage collector is not going
to look inside that because it's
allocated with a malloc block.
So here are the changes you would need to
make it work with the garbage collector.
The first change is to use
NSAllocateCollectible to
allocate our structures.
That way the garbage collector will throw
away these structures when they're done.
We're also using the NSScanned option
because the structure has a pointer
to an Objective-C object inside it.
We need the garbage collector to
know about that pointer and to see
that pointer when it's scanning.
The other change we've made is
to mark the C pointers as strong.
So the garbage collector will look
inside those pointers and also use the
correct write barrier for those pointers.
So what is the write barrier?
The write barrier tells the garbage
collector that you modified a pointer.
In particular, you modified a pointer
it wants to know about.
This allows us to implement several
garbage collection algorithms.
One of them is the
generational algorithm.
When the write barrier sees
that you assigned an old object
to point to a young object,
the write barrier tells the
garbage collection that the old
object now needs to be scanned.
Otherwise,
the generational algorithm assumes that
only the young objects are interesting,
and it's going to work harder
to delete the young objects.
There's also the ThreadLocal algorithm,
which is a new performance
optimization in Snow Leopard.
We keep track of which objects
have only been seen by the
thread that allocated them.
But for example,
if a global variable is modified
to point to a thread local object,
the write barrier sees that and
tells the garbage collector that
that object is now globally visible.
It escaped the thread.
Finally, the garbage collector works
mostly non-stopping in that it
lets the other threads run while
the garbage collector does work.
What this means is if the garbage
collector has already scanned an object,
And then the pointer is changed
while the garbage collector runs.
The write barrier tells the garbage
collector that it may need to re-scan
that pointer because it changed
behind the garbage collector's back.
Ordinarily, the write barrier is
generated by the compiler.
You don't need to do
any extra work for it.
This only works for
Objective-C compiled code.
So if you want to write C code
that uses the garbage collector,
make sure you compile your C code
with the Objective-C compiler.
Usually it's automatically inserted
into your assignment statements.
Here's an example of an instance
variable being assigned a value.
The compiler inserts this
instead of the assignment.
It actually calls it runtime function.
Similarly, if we have a structure,
we're assigning a structure value,
and the structure contains
an Objective-C variable.
The compiler will insert a
different structure copy.
It'll use a memmove
collectible instead of memmove.
If you want to have ordinary C pointers
that the garbage collection knows about,
mark them strong.
Then when you assign them,
the compiler will use another
write barrier that tells the
runtime and the garbage collector
that a C pointer has changed.
Like I said, usually the compiler
does this all for you.
Sometimes you need to do it yourself.
The two common examples
for doing it yourself,
the first one is memmove.
If you have a memcopy or a memmove
and the memory that you are
copying might contain pointers,
you need to use this
memmove function instead,
the memmove collectible function.
It works just like memmove,
but it also tells the runtime and
the garbage collector that some
pointer values might have changed.
So this is what the compiler
uses for structure assignments.
The other write barrier that
you might need to use by hand
is atomic compare and swap.
We have an OBJC compare and swap
that's a replacement for the
OS Atomic compare and swap pointer.
It just does an atomic compare and
swap and then tells the garbage
collector what it just did.
Point of terminology confusion.
There's a NOAS atomic compare
and swap pointer barrier.
This is a memory barrier and a
garbage collection rights barrier.
Don't get confused.
There are several other write
barriers in the garbage collector.
Most of the time you
don't need to call them.
They are just the
implementation of strong.
So use the strong keyword instead and
let the compiler do the rest for you.
When do you need strong?
When do you need the write barrier?
This is the magic incantation that
describes what the write barrier is for.
Use an appropriate write barrier whenever
you write a pointer to the start of a
GC-managed block into GC-scanned storage
other than the current thread's stack.
Let's see that again.
Use an appropriate write barrier.
There are several
flavors of write barrier.
If you're writing them by hand,
you need to make sure
you use the right one.
Or just use strong,
and it will choose the right one for you.
Whenever you write,
this means whenever you write.
If you're writing into any of these
storage classes that the garbage
collector wants to know about,
you must use a write barrier.
If the write barrier is absent,
the garbage collector won't
see your pointer change,
and it might destroy objects
that you wanted to keep.
A pointer to the start
of a GC-managed block.
This is the value being written.
The garbage collector only
cares about pointers to blocks.
If you're writing ints, if you're writing
pointers to other blocks,
you don't need to use the right barrier.
It's only if the value is a
garbage-collected block and the
start of a garbage-collected block,
because the garbage collector
doesn't know about anything else.
Greg Parker
[Transcript missing]
Accept the exception,
which is the current thread's stack.
You do not need to use a write
barrier for your local variables.
This is a performance optimization.
We don't want to slow down
your local variable access.
So the garbage collector
manages threads specially,
such that it does not need a
write barrier for the thread
stack of the current thread.
So, basic cheat sheet for memory
management of C data structures
and C data structures
containing Objective-C pointers.
If you want a garbage
collected CarStar block or
other ordinary memory block,
use NSAllocateCollectible
instead of malloc.
If that block might
contain pointer values,
use the NSScanned option.
For the write barriers,
most of the time you can
mark your pointers as strong.
There are a few other cases
like memcpy where you might
need to change the function.
And finally,
don't store garbage collected pointers
into unscanned memory or variables
that aren't marked strong because
the garbage collector won't see them.
A typical option instead
is to use a weak variable,
which will create a proper
weak reference instead of just
an ordinary dangling pointer.
Another option for unscanned memory
is external reference counts.
Greg Parker
External reference count is a
way to keep an object alive,
even if the garbage collector
would otherwise throw it away.
You can think of it something like
a classic Objective-C retain count,
where if the retain count is above zero,
the object lives.
In the garbage collected case,
if an external reference count is
not zero and is decremented to zero,
the object might not go away.
That just means the garbage
collector is now free to delete it,
but if there are any ordinary
pointers to the value,
the garbage collector
will still keep it alive.
Most garbage collected objects still
have an external reference count of zero,
which means the garbage collector
is fully responsible for it.
There are several different ways to
modify the external reference count.
First option is to use the
foundation NSGarbageCollector object.
Disable collector for pointer,
enable collector for pointer.
These functions nest,
they just increment and decrement
the external reference count,
and while the collector is disabled,
the collector will not
destroy that object.
Although it will destroy
any other objects,
it feels like.
You can also change the reference
count with CFRetain and CFRelease.
So just like the ordinary
Objective-C non-garbage
collector retain count.
But you have to be careful with these two
because the ordinary Objective-C methods,
retain, release, auto-release,
are ignored when garbage
collection is on.
In fact, the Objective-C runtime doesn't
even send those messages.
It just returns immediately.
What this means is they don't balance.
You cannot call cf.retain and
then later the release method.
In garbage collection,
you'll end up with a
dangling reference count,
which will just look like a leak.
You can still have leaks in
garbage collection this way.
One use for the external reference
counts is interoperating with
your C code or your C++ code.
You can use it to keep the object alive
if you're storing it somewhere where
the garbage collector wouldn't look.
For example,
if you have some C API that has a void
star context parameter in its callbacks,
and you want to pass an
Objective-C object through
that context parameter,
you can increment the reference
count of the object before
passing it into the context.
So the garbage collector will keep it
alive even though it doesn't know what
that C code is doing with the pointer.
Other examples of this are
global variables that aren't of
Objective-C types or malloc blocks
that are not using the new APIs.
Also,
if you have C++ member variables that
are storing Objective-C object pointers.
Unless you do extra work,
your C++ objects are allocated
on the malloc heap where the
garbage collector isn't looking.
So you can use the external reference
count to keep the objects alive,
just like you would in a
non-garbage collected environment.
One danger of the external
references is you can still
have reference count cycles,
just like a non-GC application
would have reference count cycles.
So you have to be careful that you
don't have an externally retained
object that then points to some
object that points to something else
that points back to the original
object and would have decremented
reference count but can't because
none of them objects will go away.
So be warned of that.
It's just like the non-GC case.
Finally, the reference count is important
if you are interoperating
with core foundation code.
For example, if you're calling the
ordinary CF create array,
CF create string, CFString create, sorry,
create or copy functions.
In non-GC, they return an object with
a retain count of one.
In garbage collection,
they return an object with an
external reference count of one,
and you are responsible
for releasing them somehow.
There are three common patterns for
managing that external reference count
in the garbage collected environment.
The first one,
if you're creating a temporary CF object,
is just simply CF release
the object when you're done,
just like you would if
garbage collection were off.
The object will not be
destroyed at that point.
But it will tell the garbage collector
that the garbage collector is free
to destroy it when it is ready.
Another alternative,
if you're storing your CF object
in an instance variable,
for example, is to call CFRelease
inside the finalize method.
This works, but you need a finalizer,
which you might not otherwise need.
And also,
you might create a cycle if your
CFArray with a retain count points
to an object that points back
to the object whose finalizer
would have called release.
The alternative in that case is
to use a new function added in
Leopard called CFMakeCollectible.
CF Make Collectible,
when garbage collection is on,
simply decrements the reference count.
So the typical use for this is to use
it immediately after calling CF Create.
So you call CF Create to create your
object with a reference count of one,
and then call CF Make Collectible to
decrement the reference count back to
zero and tell the garbage collector
it's free to destroy the object.
Greg Parker
There's one caveat to this,
which is there are some CF types
that don't work in this case.
CF clay collectible actually
causes the object to self-destruct.
As far as I know,
there aren't any publicly available
core foundation types that
you would actually manipulate.
If you do happen upon one of these,
CF make collectible will call
to your program at runtime,
so you'll actually know that
you've called CF make collectible
on a self-destructing CF type.
Two final CF notes.
First of all,
don't use any CFAllocators other
than the default allocator.
In general,
it makes the garbage collector unhappy.
Second note, which actually I don't
have a bullet point here,
your CF types are not considered
garbage collected types.
So if you have a CFStringRef,
the garbage collector will not
scan it unless you mark it strong.
So be aware of that if you have
core foundation variables in
your garbage collected program.
Next garbage collected GC topic
related to core foundation
is weak pointer containers.
Traditional non-GC programs
use core foundation containers
for non-retaining references.
A CFArray with null callbacks,
for example,
will not retain or release its values.
It'll just store them as raw pointers.
In garbage collecting, this doesn't work.
You must not use a core
foundation container with null
callbacks to store GC pointers.
The problem is it's not thread safe.
And in fact,
it cannot be made thread safe.
You cannot add any amount of locking
to your program to make it work.
The problem is the garbage collector
will be modifying these pointers
and throwing your objects away.
And you cannot create a lock that
the garbage collector will use.
So the problem with these containers,
the classic core foundation containers,
is that they just store
dangling pointers.
See if the garbage collector
does not scan them.
They're not weak pointers,
so the garbage collector
does not erase them.
And so you end up with a race,
where one thread tries
to destroy the object,
the other thread tries to
read it from the container.
The solution is to use the new
container classes added in Leopard.
These are the NSMapTable, NSHashTable,
and NSPointerArray.
These are pretty much direct analogs
for the core foundation container types.
These container types are customizable
via a type called NSPointer functions,
which works a lot like the core
foundation callbacks would.
You can use pointer comparison
to store your values,
or you can use the object
comparison is equal and hash
methods to store your values.
And the containers can
contain any type of reference.
It can be a strong
reference to the types,
it can be a weak reference
to the variables,
or it can be a copied reference.
So these types work with
garbage collected code.
They also work with
non-garbage collected code,
for the most part.
So you can use them to replace
the core foundation types you
might be using for the containers.
So the basic configurations
for the container types using
NSPointer functions look like this.
You can store an object value to
use is equal or hash to decide
whether they're equal or not.
You can store an object
pointer and just use a pointer
comparison as the hash value.
And you can use a strong reference or
a weak reference or a copied reference.
For example,
if you're storing strings in a
table and you want to protect
yourself against immutable strings.
But that's not all.
They work for more than just objects.
In fact, they work for just about
anything you can think of.
NSPointer function-based containers can
source C strings or integers or structs.
They can use malloc memory.
They can use custom memory allocator
functions you provide yourself.
So it's a full suite of
options to replace the core
foundation container types.
And they work in garbage collection.
They work in non-GC in
most configurations.
So the checkmarked options here are
the configurations that are supported,
known to work in Leopard.
It's possible that some
of the others work,
but we recommend you don't try them.
Last garbage collection topic
I want to mention is threads.
The garbage collector handles
threads specially in order to make
your local variables run fast and
in order for the garbage collector
not to have to stop your threads.
The Objective-C garbage collector
is not a world-stopping collector.
It never needs to stop all
your threads simultaneously.
Also, it doesn't stop any thread that is
not participating in Objective-C.
For example,
you might have an audio playback thread
that wants some real-time guarantees.
That thread, as long as it does not
use any Objective-C code,
will not be stopped by the garbage
collector and it will be able to
run freely without any interruption.
On the other hand,
that means you need to do some special
work if you're writing thread code,
particularly if you're
writing pthread code.
One example is thread stack scanning.
The garbage collector does
not look at all threads.
In particular,
it does not look at P threads if
they are just raw P threads that
you created with PthreadCreate.
If you want the garbage collector
to see your local variables,
you should use an NSThread
to create the thread.
Or at the start of your thread,
you can call an NSThread method,
like NSThread current thread,
which will create the NSThread object
and tell the garbage collector that
your thread is an interesting thread the
garbage collector might need to look at.
Another problem with threads
is passing pointers to them.
You must not write directly to a thread
stack that is not your thread's stack.
So don't take the address of
a local variable and give that
to another thread to modify.
The garbage collector will not see that
change and might destroy the pointer.
Also, you should not use the
PthreadCreate argument that is
passed when creating a thread.
The garbage collector does not see
that value and might destroy the object
between thread creation and the time
the thread actually starts running.
The solution, again, use NSThread.
Several NSThread methods
provide an object parameter.
You can use that to pass a garbage
collected pointer to a thread.
If you're using a subclass of NSThread,
or if you're using a
subclass of NSOperation,
you can use IVARs from those classes.
Finally, you can use the external
reference count on a thread.
You can increment the garbage
collected pointer in the parent thread,
pass it to the child thread,
and have the child thread
decremented when it's done.
There are a couple things you might
need to do when running a thread,
particularly if you are writing a
thread with an event loop or run
loop or some other top level code
that you are writing yourself.
First thing you want to do is call
the Objective-C clear stack function.
Ordinarily, the garbage collector scans
stacks conservatively,
which means it doesn't look at what
the variable types are on the stacks.
What that means is that sometimes
the garbage collector will see
a value that used to be a local
variable but is not anymore.
The garbage collector will keep
that value alive even though your
program is actually done with it.
If you call the clear stack function
at the top of your event loop or
before blocking in the run loop,
that will erase all those
stale references on the stack.
This is particularly important for
compiler optimized code because
setting local equals nil might be
optimized away by the compiler,
so the local variable is
still left stale in the stack.
The other case where you
might need to explicitly help
the compiler is explicitly
requesting a garbage collection.
The garbage collector works
fine if you don't ask it to run,
but it works better sometimes
if you do ask it to run.
Usually this is the case if
your program has created a large
number of temporary objects,
or it has some large graph of
objects that you've just thrown away.
It may be useful to tell the garbage
collector that you've just thrown
away a large number of objects,
and it might be profitable to run
the garbage collector right now.
The usual way to do this is
use the NSGarbageCollector
collectifneeded method.
And typical places you'd want to use
this are at the top of your event loop,
just before you block,
or in places where your
non-GC code used to call
The Auto-Release Pool.
If your non-garbage collected code
is destroying an auto-release pool,
there's a good chance that our
auto-release pool used to contain objects
in your non-garbage collected code.
And so it would be useful
for the garbage collector to
run to destroy those objects.
One caveat here,
you don't want to use this
if you're holding a lock,
usually, because finalizers might run
in response to this call.
And if the finalizers
try and use that lock,
and you're already holding the lock,
you end up with a deadlock.
Deadlocks are bad.
Don't do that.
Finally, the main thread when
launching your program.
You want to start the garbage collector.
In an AppKit program,
this is handled by NS Application Main.
You don't need to worry about it.
In a Foundation program,
the garbage collector, by default,
never runs unless you ask it to run.
And usually,
this is not the most performant way
for the garbage collector to run.
It runs faster on its own thread.
So if you want the garbage
collector to run faster,
call the startCollectorThread function
to start the garbage collector.
If you want to spawn the
garbage collector thread,
it will start running on
its own when it needs to.
So that's the summary of
low-level GC programming.
We've seen the memory layout
the garbage collector uses.
We've seen the write barrier,
which a garbage collector must see for
assignments of garbage collected values.
And we've seen external reference
counts and weak pointer containers,
if you're dealing with
core foundation objects,
and a few topics on threads,
if you're writing thread code,
particularly top-level thread code.
Upgrading to GC.
Let's say you have a non-garbage
collector program that you want to start
using the garbage collector with it.
It can be done.
Xcode is an example of a large program
that used to be not garbage collected,
and now it is.
The Apple System Frameworks
are another example:
Foundation, AppKit, WebKit.
They all need to run in a
garbage-collected program,
so they all need to be compatible
with garbage collection.
A new example in
Snow Leopard is Automator.
The new 64-bit Automator is
a garbage collected program,
whereas the 32-bit version is not.
Upgrading to GC can be done.
However, it may be difficult.
The difficulty usually depends
on the contents of your code.
Some warning signs to be aware of.
If your program uses DLK for things
that aren't memory management,
you might have some problems
converting to garbage collection.
If your program uses malloc a lot,
or particularly uses C++
or Crown Foundation a lot,
you might have trouble
upgrading to garbage collection.
Because there will be more work,
more code you need to examine to make
sure that you're doing the right thing.
it is compatible with
the garbage collector.
On the other hand,
the upgrading can be done incrementally.
What this means is you can gradually
adopt garbage collector patterns
that are more friendly to the garbage
collector and use mechanisms that work
whether or not your program is running.
In particular,
you can leave your source codes,
retain and release calls alone
so that they'll still work
with the garbage collector off.
For example,
if you have a program that you
want to ship the non-GC version,
but you want to experiment
with garbage collection,
you can do this in a single source base
and leave the non-GC version intact,
but experiment with garbage
collection on the side.
Here are some GC upgrade tasks,
some types of code you need to look at,
some changes you might need
to make to your program.
Most of these have to do with core
foundation or with C objects or with
things that were non-retained dangling
pointers with the garbage collector off.
Two particularly important items.
The first one is finalized methods.
Your dAlloc methods are not
called with Garbage Collection,
so you need to write finalizers.
You can do this incrementally.
You can take a first pass,
which creates finalizers that
are just based on dAlloc,
perhaps even copied
and pasted from dAlloc.
This is not the best way
to go in the long run,
but it is a way to get your program
up and running at least a little
bit under Garbage Collection.
In the long run, though,
you really want to modify
your design patterns,
reduce the number of finalizers you need,
or eliminate them entirely.
The other primary task that you
need to be aware of for most
Objective-C code is that retain and
release are not used interchangeably
with CF retain and CF release.
This is a case where core
foundation toll-bridged objects,
the toll-free bridging is not
quite as toll-free as it is in the
non-garbage collected environment.
Greg Parker
If you are writing a framework
or a plugin that needs to be
loaded into multiple applications,
there are some extra work you
need to do for garbage collection.
The problem is you don't get to choose
whether garbage collection is running.
The application chooses that.
So what that means is you have one
binary which needs to work whether
or not garbage collection is on,
and which means you have the same
source code that needs to support both.
This is how all of Apple's
system frameworks work.
Some things to be aware of
there are auto-release pools,
called the drain method
instead of the release method.
With garbage collection on,
drain is a hint that garbage collection
might be useful to run right now,
but otherwise it does nothing.
With garbage collection off,
drain destroys the
auto-release pool as normal.
Other things you need to worry
about are core foundation objects,
using NSMAP table versus a
core foundation dictionary,
using CF release in your D-alloc,
and choosing something else
for the garbage collected case,
like CF make collectible at allocation
or CF release in your finalized method.
There are several different
options for doing that.
Finally, in some cases,
you may need to check whether
the garbage collector is running.
We discourage this most of the time,
but it is possible.
The check is whether the default
collector object is nil or not.
So that's the summary of upgrading to GC.
It can be done.
We've done it for Xcode.
We've done it for other applications.
But it may be difficult.
If you're writing your code in
a high-level Objective-C style,
it might be easy.
For example,
when we originally turned on TextEdit GC,
we required one line of change.
But if you're writing low-level code,
it might be more difficult.
Finally, if you're writing a framework,
you need to be careful to write
code that works whether or not
the garbage collector is running
if that framework needs to be
loaded into an arbitrary process.
Finally, let me show you some
GC debugging techniques.
I'm going to run a demo of several
buggy garbage collection programs
and show you how to analyze them,
how to debug them.
This is a garbage collected
version of Sketch.
It's actually the developer example
Sketch with garbage collection turned on.
That's all I did.
And then I introduced a bug.
So I'm going to run
this under instruments.
I'm going to show you a leak.
Leaks do exist in garbage collection,
but they're different than they
are in non-garbage collection.
A leak in garbage collection is an object
that you expected to go away but did not.
So I've created some rectangles.
And if we look at instruments,
we can see there are now two
rectangle objects allocated.
Now I'm going to delete them.
Go back to instruments.
There's still two rectangles.
OK, why are there two rectangles?
Let me show you the backtraces
where they're allocated.
Those are the addresses.
This is the backtrace of
where it was allocated.
It is, in fact, allocated by my code.
So what I want to know is what
code is holding on to that.
What objects are referencing
the rectangle objects such
that it's still alive?
I could use the garbage collection
instrument that we've added in Xcode 3.1,
but I'm going to do it the hard way.
I'm going to show you
the command line version.
So I'm going to pull up
GDB on my sketch process.
And I'm going to ask GDB,
what is referencing?
My Rectangle Objects.
I can type the address
of one of them here.
Info GC references and an address.
So ignore this warning.
That is a bug.
It will be fixed.
The interesting point
is we have an object.
There's the address of the object
that is pointing to my rectangle.
There's some array object.
I have an array of rectangles somewhere.
That's not very useful.
Let me look at the
entire stack of pointers,
starting at a garbage collector
root and leading to my object.
This is a longer stack.
It starts at my rectangle,
and then we have the CFArray.
And then we see the undo stack.
Aha!
The undo manager has kept a pointer
to my rectangle so that I can undo.
And if I continue the process,
I can actually undo and
get the rectangles back.
So that's what happened.
That's not really a leak.
That was just a place where I didn't
understand how my program worked.
So let's see a real leak.
I'm going to create some circle objects.
I've introduced a different
bug into the circles.
And then, let me close my document.
What I expect to see--
[Transcript missing]
So let's do the same trick
with the document object,
see what code is still holding onto that.
Info, gcroots, and the address.
5E0.
There's the roots.
We have my document object,
and we have a global variable
called RecentDocument still
pointing to my document object.
In fact, if we went and we looked
at the rectangle objects,
they are also being
referenced through that path.
Or they would have been
if I hadn't deleted them.
Oops.
Never mind.
They would have been if
I had run the demo properly.
So let's take a look at my code and
find that recent document variable.
Find in project, recent document.
There it is, static global variable,
no surprise.
For some reason, I was really stupid,
and now my init method,
I've created a pointer to
the most recent document.
Well, of course, that pointer will keep
one document alive,
whichever one is allocated last.
One fix for this would be to use week.
Now that global variable will
still point to that document,
but the garbage collector is
free to destroy it and will
zero the pointer when it's done.
So I can rebuild my program
and run instruments again.
I'll see that I can create my document.
There it is in the Instruments window.
When I close it, it goes away.
Document count is now zero.
So that bug's fixed.
But don't applaud yet,
because the program is still buggy.
Let me bring up my sketch process again.
Of course, I still have two of them
because GDB is still running.
I'm going to draw some circles.
Oops, I'm not going to do that yet,
because I need to be running
in the Xcode debugger.
So let me run in the debugger so
I can show you the console message as
being printed because of the next bug.
The next bug is because of circles.
Here's my GDB console.
I close the document.
And I get an error in the console
log complaining about resurrection.
Our garbage collector does
not allow resurrection,
which is when an object is being
finalized and then somebody tries
to keep that object alive by
storing it into a global variable
or otherwise trying to preserve it.
Our garbage collector doesn't allow that.
Once you hit finalize,
the object is doomed.
It will be destroyed no
matter what you try and do.
In this case,
the garbage collector is complaining,
particularly the write
barrier is complaining,
that we wrote an object pointer
to a finalizing object into memory
that the garbage collector can see.
In particular,
we can see it's a circle object.
In this case, it's actually a key value
observed circle object.
And we can see the address that the
garbage collector complained about.
There's also a handy function that
the garbage collector calls where you
can set a breakpoint when this occurs.
I've already done this,
which is why I'm stopped in
the debugger instead of having
the program continue to run.
At this point,
we can look up the backtrace
of AutoZone ResurrectionError,
and we see that I'm in the
Circle Finalize method.
And again, oh gee,
I wrote a broken Finalize method.
Imagine that.
In this case,
I've created an NSMutable array,
which is not dead,
and I've stored the Circle pointer
into that not-dead array.
The garbage collector sees this and
complains that you now have a dangling,
or will, once the object is deleted,
you'll have a dangling
pointer to the Circle object.
Obvious solution, don't do that.
And since this is my test program,
and this is the only reason why
I wrote this finalized method,
delete it entirely.
So this is an example of why you
need to make sure your finalizers
just do as little work as possible,
because they might do work that,
for example,
stores the object in an array,
and then you'll get a
resurrection warning.
So now the program would work.
I won't bother showing you
the working version now.
The next example I want to
show you is some crashes due
to write barrier problems and
due to scanned memory problems.
This is some C code that I've
converted directly to Objective-C,
and converted directly to
garbage collection without using
actually much Objective-C at all.
It's really mostly a C program.
I have a C structure.
indicating a work item
for my work queue program.
I have a producer thread which
is generating these work objects.
And I have a consumer thread which
is reading these work objects from
a list and destroying them later.
In the garbage collection version,
I actually don't have any free
calls or any release calls in
this code because I'm trying to
use garbage collected C objects.
So in particular,
we can see that I've used
nsalocate collectible to
create the array of objects.
And I'm using NSAllocate collectible
for each individual work item structure.
So if we run this
program in the debugger,
All will not be happy.
Bad access.
That's not good.
I'm not supposed to get pointer errors
with the garbage collector program,
am I?
Well,
I'm writing garbage collected C code,
and C code is not always as
happy with the garbage collector.
In this case,
I crashed nobjc-message-send.
And that's not really a
very useful backtrace.
Do I have a better one here?
No.
Unfortunately, I'm not getting the
friendly backtrace I wanted,
which actually showed me
where it was crashing.
So you'll have to take my word for it
when I tell you it's crashing here.
Maybe I can do it better than that.
Oh, because I'm in the wrong frame.
I bet if I rerun it again,
it'll die in a different place.
That's more like it.
So here's the instruction
I really wanted to crash on.
This instruction is checking,
is doing a sanity check
on my work object.
I have an index in the work object,
which is the same as
the index in the array,
or should be, but in this case, it's not.
So let's look at the
contents of that object.
So that does not look like
a very friendly index value
between 1 and about 10,000,
is it?
So something has destroyed the object.
Most likely, it destroyed the object and
reallocated it as something else.
So that means we need to look
at where this pointer came from
and where it is being stored.
It was created by my producer, Thread.
This is the code that's
allocating the object,
and we're storing it into this array.
So the array is correctly being
scanned with the NS scanned option.
So that suggests that it should work,
that the garbage collector
should see that pointer.
But it turns out the NSCAN option
is insufficient in this case because
I'm missing the right barrier.
Now, the one good way to decide whether
a write barrier is responsible for
the crash you're seeing is to change
the garbage collector's behavior
such that it works more reliably
even without a write barrier.
You can do this by setting a
couple of environment variables.
Obviously, use TLC, no,
turns off the thread local collector.
Obc disable generational.
Yes.
This turns off the
generational algorithm,
which means all collections
are full collections,
which means the write barrier is not
actually necessary some of the time.
So since I'm having trouble
reproducing this bug,
I won't try and show you
running with these two set.
But typically,
a write barrier error will show
itself when it crashes normally and
does not crash with these values set.
Turns out the problem
in my program is here.
This variable is a local variable,
but it is an indirect pointer.
[Transcript missing]
So that's one of the bugs in my program.
Unfortunately,
it is tricky to track down.
Right barrier errors are not
the easiest ones to debug with
our current debugging tools.
Turns out there's another bug.
I know this 'cause I wrote it.
Another bad access.
This one in a slightly different place.
We go to our backtrace.
This time, the item structure is intact.
The index value is correct.
First, it doesn't want to tell me that,
but it is correct.
We're having trouble accessing
the NSNumber that is also
part of the work item.
So again, we can print the value.
Looks like an ordinary pointer value.
We see the index is reasonable,
so that part is correct now.
Let's look at the NSNumber object.
Greg Parker
Let's do it this way.
I do XI sub value.
This should be an NSNumber object,
but that's not an NSNumber class pointer.
So this NS value has been scrambled.
If we run it a couple more times,
We may actually get another
crash I'd like to show you.
Ignore those.
Those are another bug I'm
not going to show you.
So the other case that you'll commonly
see of an is a variable that is
trashed is one that looks like this.
Typically, it'll start with some Fs and
then have some random values,
and it'll end misaligned.
What is happening here is that
the value is obviously wrong,
but the bitwise negation of the value
looks more like a reasonable pointer.
It's actually in your heap.
It's actually an even-numbered value,
that sort of thing.
The garbage collector and actually
the C memory manager mangle their
free list pointers to be negated,
and those free list pointers are
in the same slot as your ISA.
So you can frequently tell if an object
is actually a deallocated object because
it'll look like a mangled pointer.
So in this case,
I have the NSNumber object,
which is being prematurely
destroyed before we get here.
So I need to look at
where it was allocated,
where it was stored in the meantime.
In this case,
the NSNumber is being stored in a work T.
We should be getting the correct
write barrier because this
is a garbage-collected type.
The garbage collector
should know about that.
The compiler should issue
a write barrier for us.
So this is the assignment.
If we disassemble the code here,
we would see the write barrier present.
And this is the memory
where it is stored,
which is scanned memory, except it's not.
We should have used an Escand option.
Because this is an ordinary heap block,
the garbage collector won't look in
it for my Annis number pointer unless
I allocate it with the scanned option.
So now my program should really work.
Runs, it starts up,
and now my producer and consumer
threads are actually seeing all the
objects properly garbage collected,
properly managed.
Not sure why you're plotting.
It's really easy to fix
bugs you wrote yourself.
So again, debugging these problems can be
difficult in a large program,
especially with the write
barriers and trying to diagnose
which write barrier was missing.
So the best way to write this program
is to use proper Objective-C objects,
Objective-C container types,
if I don't need the really
low level C performance.
So that's all I have for you today.
At this point,
let me show you the info slide here.
Of course,
I left my clicker in this pocket.
So for more information,
we can talk to Michael Jurowicz
and the other DevTools evangelists.
We also have documentation on the
website about the Garbage Collector,
writing Garbage Collector programs.
So now,
I'd like to invite Michael Jurowicz
and the rest of the Garbage
Collection team for some Q&A.